# This publication is intellectual property of Canonical Ltd. Its contents
# can be duplicated, either in part or in whole, provided that a copyright
# label is visibly located on each copy.
#
# All information found in this book has been compiled with utmost
# attention to detail. However, this does not guarantee complete accuracy.
# Neither Canonical Ltd, the authors, nor the translators shall be held
# liable for possible errors or the consequences thereof.
#
# Many of the software and hardware descriptions cited in this book
# are registered trademarks. All trade names are subject to copyright
# restrictions and may be registered trade marks. Canonical Ltd
# essentially adheres to the manufacturer's spelling.
#
# Names of products and trademarks appearing in this book (with or without
# specific notation) are likewise subject to trademark and trade protection
# laws and may thus fall under copyright restrictions.
#


=pod

=head1 NAME

aa-exec - confine a program with the specified AppArmor profile

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<aa-exec> [options] [--] [I<E<lt>commandE<gt>> ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<aa-exec> is used to launch a program confined by the specified profile
and or namespace.  If both a profile and namespace are specified command
will be confined by profile in the new policy namespace.  If only a namespace
is specified, the profile name of the current confinement will be used.  If
neither a profile or namespace is specified command will be run using
standard profile attachment (ie. as if run without the aa-exec command).

If the arguments are to be pasted to the I<E<lt>commandE<gt>> being invoked
by aa-exec then -- should be used to separate aa-exec arguments from the
command.
  aa-exec -p profile1 -- ls -l

=head1 OPTIONS
B<aa-exec> accepts the following arguments:

=over 4

=item -p PROFILE, --profile=PROFILE

confine I<E<lt>commandE<gt>> with PROFILE. If the PROFILE is not specified
use the current profile name (likely unconfined).

=item -n NAMESPACE, --namespace=NAMESPACE

use profiles in NAMESPACE.  This will result in confinement transitioning
to using the new profile namespace.

=item -i, --immediate

transition to PROFILE before doing executing I<E<lt>commandE<gt>>.  This
subjects the running of I<E<lt>commandE<gt>> to the exec transition rules
of the current profile.

=item -v, --verbose

show commands being performed

=item -d, --debug

show commands and error codes

=item --

Signal the end of options and disables further option processing. Any
arguments after the -- are treated as arguments of the command.  This is
useful when passing arguments to the I<E<lt>commandE<gt>> being invoked by
aa-exec.

=back

=head1 BUGS

If you find any bugs, please report them at
L<https://bugs.launchpad.net/apparmor/+filebug>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

aa-stack(8), aa-namespace(8), apparmor(7), apparmor.d(5), aa_change_profile(3),
aa_change_onexec(3) and L<https://wiki.apparmor.net>.

=cut
