# This publication is intellectual property of Canonical Ltd. Its contents
# can be duplicated, either in part or in whole, provided that a copyright
# label is visibly located on each copy.
#
# All information found in this book has been compiled with utmost
# attention to detail. However, this does not guarantee complete accuracy.
# Neither Canonical Ltd, the authors, nor the translators shall be held
# liable for possible errors or the consequences thereof.
#
# Many of the software and hardware descriptions cited in this book
# are registered trademarks. All trade names are subject to copyright
# restrictions and may be registered trade marks. Canonical Ltd
# essentially adheres to the manufacturer's spelling.
#
# Names of products and trademarks appearing in this book (with or without
# specific notation) are likewise subject to trademark and trade protection
# laws and may thus fall under copyright restrictions.
#


=pod

=head1 NAME

aa-enabled - test whether AppArmor is enabled

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<aa-enabled> [options]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<aa-enabled> is used to determine if AppArmor is enabled.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<aa-enabled> accepts the following arguments:

=over 4

=item -h, --help

Display a brief usage guide.

=item -q, --quiet

Do not output anything to stdout. This option is intended to be used by
scripts that simply want to use the exit code to determine if AppArmor is
enabled.

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

Upon exiting, B<aa-enabled> will set its exit status to the following values:

=over 4

=item B<0>

if AppArmor is enabled.

=item B<1>

if AppArmor is not enabled/loaded.

=item B<2>

intentionally not used as an B<aa-enabled> exit status.

=item B<3>

if the AppArmor control files aren't available under /sys/kernel/security/.

=item B<4>

if B<aa-enabled> doesn't have enough privileges to read the apparmor control files.

=item B<64>

if any unexpected error or condition is encountered.

=back

=head1 BUGS

If you find any bugs, please report them at
L<https://bugs.launchpad.net/apparmor/+filebug>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

apparmor(7), apparmor.d(5), aa_is_enabled(2), and L<https://wiki.apparmor.net>.

=cut
