# This publication is intellectual property of Canonical Ltd. Its contents
# can be duplicated, either in part or in whole, provided that a copyright
# label is visibly located on each copy.
#
# All information found in this book has been compiled with utmost
# attention to detail. However, this does not guarantee complete accuracy.
# Neither Canonical Ltd, the authors, nor the translators shall be held
# liable for possible errors or the consequences thereof.
#
# Many of the software and hardware descriptions cited in this book
# are registered trademarks. All trade names are subject to copyright
# restrictions and may be registered trade marks. Canonical Ltd
# essentially adheres to the manufacturer's spelling.
#
# Names of products and trademarks appearing in this book (with or without
# specific notation) are likewise subject to trademark and trade protection
# laws and may thus fall under copyright restrictions.
#


=pod

=head1 NAME

aa-notify - display information about logged AppArmor messages.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<aa-notify> [option]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<aa-notify> will display a summary or provide desktop notifications
for AppArmor DENIED messages.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<aa-notify> accepts the following arguments:

=over 4

=item -p, --poll

poll AppArmor logs and display desktop notifications. Can be used with '-s'
option to display a summary on startup.

=item --display $DISPLAY

set the DISPLAY environment variable to $DISPLAY
(might be needed if sudo resets $DISPLAY)

=item -f FILE, --file=FILE

search FILE for AppArmor messages

=item -l, --since-last

show summary since last login.

=item -s NUM, --since-days=NUM

show summary for last NUM of days.

=item -u USER, --user=USER

user to drop privileges to when running privileged. When used with the -p
option, this should be set to the user that will receive desktop notifications.
This has no effect when running under sudo.

=item -w NUM, --wait=NUM

wait NUM seconds before displaying notifications (for use with -p)

=item -v, --verbose

show messages with summaries.

=item -h, --help

displays a short usage statement.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

System-wide configuration for B<aa-notify> is done via
/etc/apparmor/notify.conf:

  # set to 'yes' to enable AppArmor DENIED notifications
  show_notifications="yes"

  # only people in use_group can use aa-notify
  use_group="admin"

  # OPTIONAL - custom notification message body
  message_body="This is a custom notification message."

  # OPTIONAL - custom notification message footer
  message_footer="For more information visit https://foo.com"

Per-user configuration is done via $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/apparmor/notify.conf (or
the deprecated ~/.apparmor/notify.conf if it exists):

  # set to 'yes' to enable AppArmor DENIED notifications
  show_notifications="yes"

=head1 BUGS

B<aa-notify> needs to be able to read the logfiles containing the
AppArmor DENIED messages.

If you find any additional bugs, please report them to Launchpad at
L<https://bugs.launchpad.net/apparmor/+filebug>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

apparmor(7)

=cut
