# This publication is intellectual property of Novell Inc. and Canonical
# Ltd. Its contents can be duplicated, either in part or in whole, provided
# that a copyright label is visibly located on each copy.
#
# All information found in this book has been compiled with utmost
# attention to detail. However, this does not guarantee complete accuracy.
# Neither SUSE LINUX GmbH, Canonical Ltd, the authors, nor the translators
# shall be held liable for possible errors or the consequences thereof.
#
# Many of the software and hardware descriptions cited in this book
# are registered trademarks. All trade names are subject to copyright
# restrictions and may be registered trade marks. SUSE LINUX GmbH
# and Canonical Ltd. essentially adhere to the manufacturer's spelling.
#
# Names of products and trademarks appearing in this book (with or without
# specific notation) are likewise subject to trademark and trade protection
# laws and may thus fall under copyright restrictions.
#


=pod

=head1 NAME

logprof.conf - configuration file for expert options that modify the
behavior of the AppArmor aa-logprof(1) program.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The aa-logprof(1) program can be configured to have certain default behavior
by the contents of logprof.conf.

The B<[qualifiers]> section lists specific programs that should have
a subset of the full ix/px/ux list when asking what mode to execute
it using.

Since creating a separate profile for /bin/bash is dangerous, we can
specify that for /bin/bash, only (I)nherit, (U)nconstrained, and (D)eny
should be allowed options and only those will show up in the prompt when
we're asking about adding that to a profile.

Likewise, if someone currently exec's /bin/mount in ix or px mode, things
won't work, so we can provide only (U)nconstrained and (D)eny as options.

And certain apps like grep, awk, sed, cp, and mkdir should always
inherit the parent profile rather than having their own profile or
running unconfined, so for them we can specify that only (I)nherit and
(D)eny are the allowed options.

Any programs that are not listed in the qualifiers section get the full
(I)nherit / (P)rofile / (U)nconstrained / (D)eny option set.

If the user is doing something tricky and wants different behavior,
they can tweak or remove the corresponding line in the conf file.

The B<[defaulthat]> section lists changehat-aware programs and what hat
aa-logprof(1) will collapse the entries to for that program if the user
specifies that the access should be allowed, but should not have it's
own hat.

The B<[globs]> section allows modification of the logprof rule engine
with respect to globbing suggestions that the user will be prompted with.

The format of each line is-- "E<lt>perl globE<gt> = E<lt>apparmor globE<gt>".

When aa-logprof(1) asks about a specific path, if the perl glob matches the
path, it replaces the part of the path that matched with the corresponding
apparmor glob and adds it to the list of globbing suggestions.

Lines starting with # are comments and are ignored.

=head1 EXAMPLE

  [qualifiers]
    # things will very likely be painfully broken if bash has it's own profile
    /bin/bash  = iu

    # mount doesn't work if it's confined
    /bin/mount = u

    # these helper utilities should inherit the parent profile and
    # shouldn't have their own profiles
    /bin/awk   = i
    /bin/grep  = i
    /bin/sed   = i

  [defaulthat]
    /usr/sbin/sshd           = EXEC
    /usr/sbin/httpd2         = DEFAULT_URI
    /usr/sbin/httpd2-prefork = DEFAULT_URI

  [globs]
    # /foo/bar/lib/libbaz.so -> /foo/bar/lib/lib*
    /lib/lib[^\/]+so[^\/]*$  = /lib/lib*so*

    # strip kernel version numbers from kernel module accesses
    ^/lib/modules/[^\/]+\/   = /lib/modules/*/

    # strip pid numbers from /proc accesses
    ^/proc/\d+/              = /proc/*/


=head1 BUGS

If you find any bugs, please report them at
L<https://bugs.launchpad.net/apparmor/+filebug>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

apparmor(7), apparmor.d(5), aa-enforce(1), aa-complain(1),
aa-disable(1), aa_change_hat(2), aa-logprof(1), aa-genprof(1), and
L<https://wiki.apparmor.net>.

=cut
