# This publication is intellectual property of Canonical Ltd. Its contents
# can be duplicated, either in part or in whole, provided that a copyright
# label is visibly located on each copy.
#
# All information found in this book has been compiled with utmost
# attention to detail. However, this does not guarantee complete accuracy.
# Neither Canonical Ltd, the authors, nor the translators shall be held
# liable for possible errors or the consequences thereof.
#
# Many of the software and hardware descriptions cited in this book
# are registered trademarks. All trade names are subject to copyright
# restrictions and may be registered trade marks. Canonical Ltd.
# essentially adhere to the manufacturer's spelling.
#
# Names of products and trademarks appearing in this book (with or without
# specific notation) are likewise subject to trademark and trade protection
# laws and may thus fall under copyright restrictions.
#


=pod

=head1 NAME

aa_splitcon - split the confinement context into a label and mode

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<#include E<lt>sys/apparmor.hE<gt>>

B<char *aa_splitcon(char *con, char **mode);>

Link with B<-lapparmor> when compiling.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The aa_splitcon() function splits a confinement context into separate label
and mode strings. The @con string is modified so that the label portion is NUL
terminated. The enforcement mode is also NUL terminated and the parenthesis
surrounding the mode are removed. If @mode is non-NULL, it will point to the
first character in the enforcement mode string on success.

The Linux kernel's /proc/E<lt>PIDE<gt>/attr/current interface appends a
trailing newline character to AppArmor contexts that are read from that file.
If @con contains a single trailing newline character, it will be stripped by
aa_splitcon() prior to all other processing.

=head1 RETURN VALUE

Returns a pointer to the first character in the label string. NULL is returned
on error.

=head1 EXAMPLE

 Context                        Label               Mode 
 -----------------------------  ------------------  -------
 unconfined                     unconfined          NULL
 unconfined\n                   unconfined          NULL
 /bin/ping (enforce)            /bin/ping           enforce
 /bin/ping (enforce)\n          /bin/ping           enforce
 /usr/sbin/rsyslogd (complain)  /usr/sbin/rsyslogd  complain

=head1 BUGS

None known. If you find any, please report them at
L<https://bugs.launchpad.net/apparmor/+filebug>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

aa_getcon(2) and L<https://wiki.apparmor.net>.

=cut
